**Kickstarting a Career in DevOps Engineering: Things to know** 
===============================================================

As a newcomer to the tech industry, one of the primary challenges you
may face is deciding which field to pursue. Choosing a tech career
begins with self-reflection. Understanding your interests, strengths,
and what you are passionate about is essential before selecting a
specific path. This article zooms in on individuals who have embraced
DevOps as their career path.

DevOps is not just a job, it\'s a transformative force in the tech
industry. It serves as a bridge between the roles of developers and
operations teams, ensuring a seamless transition from software
development to deployment and usage. DevOps is often described as a
culture that fosters collaboration between these traditionally siloed
teams, and it\'s this transformative power that makes it such an
exciting career path to pursue.

In the DevOps field, you\'ll work with various tools that facilitate
software development and infrastructure management aspects. These tools
include:

-   **CI/CD Tools**: For continuous integration and continuous
    > deployment.

-   **Infrastructure as Code (IaC) Tools**: These include Terraform,
    > Pulumi, and AWS CloudFormation, which automate infrastructure
    > provisioning.

-   **Cloud Tools**: For managing cloud environments.

-   **Monitoring Tools**: To ensure the health and performance of
    > systems.

-   **Virtual Servers/Containers**: For scalable and efficient
    > application deployment.

-   **Databases**: For managing data.

-   **Programming Languages**: Including Go, Python, JavaScript, and
    > Java, which you should understand as you\'ll interact with them in
    > your daily tasks.

Different companies offer tools that perform similar functions but with
unique features tailored to specific needs. For instance, tools like
Ansible, Chef, and others provide various approaches to automating
configuration and deployment processes in infrastructure management.

If you've chosen DevOps as your career path, it\'s essential to commit
to continuous learning. Allocating at least 20 hours per week to
mastering the necessary tools and working on related projects is
vital---this cannot be overstated. This is where Pistis Tech Hub can
make a significant difference. At Pistis Tech, we offer a project-based
learning approach where each tool is taught in-depth through practical
application. As the saying goes, "I hear and I forget, I see and I
remember, I do and I understand." Our method ensures that you learn,
retain, and apply your knowledge effectively.

Additionally, while you may not primarily code, it is vital you have a
grasp of programming language basics like Go, Python, JavaScript, and
Java, as you\'ll frequently interact with code in your role.

Invest in a modern laptop with ample RAM and storage. Many tools you\'ll
need to install require up-to-date hardware; some have specific system
requirements that a current, high-performance laptop can attain.

Embrace grit and a growth mindset. Don\'t be intimidated by those ahead
of you---they were likely in your shoes not long ago. Focus on your
journey, knowing that it takes time to refine your skills before landing
the big opportunities that drew you to this career path. With a growth
mindset, you\'ll see every challenge as an opportunity to learn and
grow, making your journey in DevOps all the more rewarding.
